HSMA Project Register - Active Projects																												
Code Key :		
Project Code	Project Title	Lead	Method Area(s)	Complete?	Impact / Outcomes	Additional Notes		First Digit = cohort number of lead																				
1100	Geographic modelling of resource utilisation at Devon Air Ambulance	Hannah Trebilcock	Geographic Modelling, Forecasting			Sammi to primarily mentor, Richard Pilbery to collaborate																						
4100	Automating and scaling waiting list equity analysis at a trust level	Matt Eves	StreamLit and General Python					Second Digit = 0 if Inception Project, 1-9 otherwise																				
5100	Extra funding allocation - inequality tool	Peter Saiu	StreamLit and General Python	Complete	"National tool developed : https://www.heec.co.uk/extra-funding-allocation-inequality-tool-efit/
Approach underpinning app used in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough for bowel cancer screening - led to 99% of GP surgeries improving coverage, and 75% increase in proportion of 2 week wait referrals sent with a Faecal Immunochemistry Test (FIT)
Working with Cornwall and IOS ICB to look at adoption"	"The program would be FOSS and is for health and social care use (commissioning decisions i.e. allocation of extra funding)
About the project
The problem:
While core funding for primary care is well regulated (by using a variant of the Carr-Hill formula), there is no national guidance/methodology to allocate extra funding for primary care by Integrated Care Boards (ICBs) - the old CCGs that commisioned services. Every ICB has many programme directors/project managers for the various disease areas who can split the money at their own discretion who might not take into consideration available data and might just split the money equally (by population size) - effectively widen inequalities even further.
In my team we always propose to use an equation from our Inequality strategy review which splits the money based on deprivation score and local needs. For example, if a cancer team receives extra funding for FIT screening, I calculate the allocation of extra funding to GP practices based on bowel cancer screening uptake data and give more to those who have low uptake (in a proportional way). Many indicators can be used, so a team focusing on high-intensity users will use data on high-intensity users etc. However, even if programme managers were aware of the equation, they might not know how to calculate the allocation and might need analysts to do it for them in Excel (excuse the language, can we write the 'E' word here?!?).
The solution:
I’m creating a tool (method: general python (panda dataframes etc) using the user-friendly Streamlit web-app where a user would input the amount of funding, select the ICB, specify the demographics (age and gender for intervention) and tweak the indicator and the weights (e.g. to give more based inequality or prevalence of disease etc).  Upon hitting the 'Calculate' button the result is instantaneous and you can download the table with the calculated allocations.
By making this tool available to all ICBs nationally, we can establish a general consensus on how ICBs can promptly split extra funding to primary care taking into consideration inequalities and local needs."																						
5101	Modelling resourcing scenarios to meet increases in demand on a Devon eye clinic	Kayleigh Haydock	Discrete Event Simulation			This project will develop a DES model of an eye clinic at Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust.  Specifically, the model will use "what if?" analysis to explore increasing staff and room resources to assess which would have the biggest impact on meeting a forecast 10% per year increase in demand.  The model will also explore the potential impact of AI support in the POD clinic in terms of reduced activity time to assess potential impact on the eye clinic service waiting times and time in system.																						
5102	Using Machine Learning to predict whether a patient might develop a SSI (Surgical Site Infection)	Becky Sillitoe	Machine Learning			"I've been working with our Infection Prevention and Control Team on the reporting of Surgical Site Infections (SSI) for at least a year now.  There are a couple of applications within this work where the ability to predict whether a patient might develop an SSI would be useful so I've started to develop a simple classification model just to predict whether a patient will develop an infection.  There are some challenges with this work, mainly that SSIs are, thankfully, rare events."																						
6000	Core20PLUS5 : Using ML and Explainable AI to predict and understand mental health appointment DNAs to reduce inequalities	Heath McDonald	Machine Learning, Geographic Modelling			"Core20PLUS5 is a national NHS England approach to inform action to reduce healthcare inequalities at both national and system level. The approach defines a target population – the ‘Core20PLUS’ – and identifies ‘5’ focus clinical areas requiring accelerated improvement.
Core20 is defined as:
The most deprived 20% of the national population as identified by the national Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD). The IMD has seven domains with indicators accounting for a wide range of social determinants of health.
PLUS is defined as:
PLUS population groups should be identified at a local level. Populations we would expect to see identified are ethnic minority communities; people with a learning disability and autistic people; people with multiple long-term health conditions; other groups that share protected characteristics as defined by the Equality Act 2010; groups experiencing social exclusion, known as inclusion health groups coastal communities (where there may be small areas of high deprivation hidden amongst relative affluence).
The 5 is defined as:
There are five clinical areas of focus which require accelerated improvement. 1. Maternity
2. Severe mental illness (SMI)
3. Chronic respiratory disease
4. Early cancer diagnosis
5. Hypertension case-finding and optimal management and lipid optimal management
As a provider of Mental Health Services for SMI, Lancashire & South Cumbria NHS Foundation Trust is committed to helping to deliver the aims of Core20Plus5. The aim of this HSMA project is therefore to:
Use machine learning to help understand whether there is a correlation between failed attendance of mental health outpatient appointments and deprivation, or whether this could be being influenced by other factors (features) such as age, ethnicity, the distance travelled to get to those appointments etc.
As use of machine learning is relatively new to our trust I also plan to use explainable AI to help users understand what the results mean"																						
6001	DES Modelling of non-elective flow	Helena Robinson	DES, StreamLit			"DES Modelling of NEL Flow
Problem: Poor patient flow is leading to (very) long waits for admission in ED. This means there is poor performance against all the key ED wait metrics for the hospital and more importantly, there is evidence that long waits for admission in ED are associated with poorer outcomes for patients.
Management strategies: The two main strategies employed to tackle this problem is increasing the number of beds (by creation of escalation beds) and trying to decrease discharge delays (reducing length of stay). Additionally we have a Same Day Emergency Care (SDEC) facility and it is unclear how the number of people admitted through this facility impacts the waits of those in ED.
Key questions:
Given x beds, how far does admitted length of stay have to reduce to meet particular waiting time targets for those queuing in ED? (Evidence based target)
If we open 15 beds but keep admitted length of stay the same, what is the impact on ED waiting times and the various targets? (Evidence for a particular management strategy)
What is the optimum number of people to stream from ED to SDEC to minimise ED waits? (Evidence for a particular management strategy)
Outputs:
I plan to create DES model(s), using the HSMA training, that are able to provide evidence for the questions above. I would  also hope to create a friendly user interface that my stakeholders could use to try out scenarios and help understand how the model works."										